## YUAA CRD

### Purpose
Our goal is to develop a cosmic ray detector (CRD) to serve as the scientific payload for the Yale Undergraduate Aerospace Association (YUAA) CubeSat. We will use cosmic rays to map the boundaries of the South Atlantic Anomaly (SAA).

### General CubeSat Info

CubeSats are miniature satellites composed of units consisting of 10 cm cubes. Yale was chosen by NASA as one of sixteen schools across the country whose CubeSat will be launched into space as auxiliary payloads on NASA missions. The Yale CubeSat consists of two 10 cm cube units. The CubeSat team is divided into several subteams: attitude determination and control (ADCS), radio, software, and cosmic ray detector (CRD). The CRD team interacts significantly with the ADCS and software teams. The software team writes C programs for our I2C components. We work with the ADCS team to coordinate mechanical design in the CubeSat, which is necessary due to the size constraints. The bulkiest part of the ADCS system is the gravity gradient boom (GGB), a measuring tape which spools out of the bottom of the CubeSat to generate restoring torques which stabilize the CubeSat’s orientation. The GGB includes a rotary encoder which provides feedback on the length of the GGB. The ADCS system also includes magnetorquers, electromagnets which generate torques using the Earth’s magnetic field, to maneuver the CubeSat.

### Background

#### Cosmic Rays

Cosmic rays are high-energy radiation originating from outside the solar system. About 99% of cosmic rays are bare atomic nuclei. 90% of these nuclei are protons (hydrogen nuclei), 9% are alpha particles (helium nuclei), and 1% are heavier elements. The other 1% of cosmic rays are beta particles (solitary electrons). Cosmic rays also include trace amounts of antiparticles like positrons and antiprotons. Sometimes, gamma rays (high-energy photons) are also considered cosmic rays. When cosmic rays enter the Earth’s atmosphere, they collide with atoms and molecules, producing a cascade of lighter particles known as secondary cosmic rays. Secondary cosmic rays are typically composed of neutrons, pions, kaons, and their antiparticles. Pions and kaons quickly decay into muons, neutrinos, and their antiparticles, which can be detected on Earth’s surface. The muon lifetime of 2.2 us should not be enough for muons to reach the surface of Earth, but due to relativistic time dilation their effective lifetime is longer in our reference frame. 1 Muons have similar properties to electrons but about 200 times the mass. Because muons are charged particles, we can use muons to test our detection circuitry before sending it into space.

#### Earth’s Magnetic Field

The Earth has a dipolar magnetic field generated by convection currents in Earth’s molten iron and nickel outer core. Energetic charged particles originating from solar wind and cosmic rays are captured by Earth’s magnetic field. Charged particles in a magnetic field move in helices about magnetic field lines. The concentration of charged particles peaks in two distinct regions above Earth’s surface, known as the inner and outer Van Allen belts. The gap between the Van Allen belts is caused by low frequency radio waves whose origin is still an area of active
research. 

There is a nonzero angle between the axis of Earth’s dipole magnetic field and its axis of rotation, causing the inner Van Allen belt to make its closest approach of about 2000 km to Earth’s surface above the South Atlantic. This region of enhanced radiation is called the South Atlantic Anomaly (SAA). The SAA dips low enough to intersect low Earth orbit. Satellites passing through the SAA are exposed to elevated levels of radiation for minutes at a time, leading to malfunctions, loss of observational time for telescopes, and danger to astronauts in the ISS.

#### Scintillators

A scintillator is a material that emits photons when excited by ionizing radiation. Commonly used scintillators often emit photons in the optical bands. There are many types of scintillators including organic crystals, organic liquids, plastic scintillators, inorganic crystals, gaseous scintillators, glasses, and perovskites. We use plastic scintillators, in which the primary fluorescent emitter, or fluor, is suspended in a base.

### Design

#### Mechanical

Using a band saw and a mill, we cut the scintillator down to a 1 cm cube due to size constraints in the CubeSat. Within the SAA, the particle flux is so high that our detection events would overlap. A layer of aluminum shielding around the scintillator reduces the number of events to the order of ~100 events per second. We calculated that a shielding thickness of 7 mm is sufficient. Because protons are more massive than electrons, cosmic ray protons typically have more energy than cosmic ray electrons, so the ratio of proton to electron events increases with shielding thickness.

The shielding is a 25 x 25 x 28 mm rectangular prism of aluminum with an 11 x 11 x 14 mm hole in the center for the scintillator cube and the SiPM. For ease of machining, the shielding is composed of 3 sections which are held together by 6-32 screws. At each of the bottom corners, the aluminum extends slightly further to give space for mounting holes.

When a charged particle passes through the scintillator, it deposits its kinetic energy into photons. We coat five sides of the scintillator with a reflective paint so that most photons eventually exit the scintillator at a single face. The non-coated face has a silicon photomultiplier (SiPM) which will detect the photons. The SiPM is optically coupled to the scintillator with optical jelly, an amorphous material with a prescribed refractive index. The SiPM is held fast against the scintillator by rubber stops which push against the inside faces of the shielding.

The SiPM is soldered onto a small printed circuit board (PCB) using a ball grid array (BGA). The PCB contains pads for the anode and cathode. Wires will be soldered directly to these pads and exit the shielding through a hole. The SiPM is AC coupled to a charge-sensitive preamplifier (preamp). The AC coupling circuit and the preamp come from an evaluation kit created by Ketek. The AC coupling circuit is mounted in a Thorlabs mount and the preamp is mounted in a rectangular aluminum box which acts as a Faraday cage, protecting it from radiation.

All of the circuitry minus the AC coupling circuit and preamp are contained on a custom 4-layer PCB, whose irregular shape is determined by the size constraints imposed by the GGB. This custom PCB will connect to the SiPM, AC coupling circuit, and preamp by a combination of wires and micro coax cables. Wires will be twisted together in pairs for extra stability.

#### Electrical

Our custom analog circuitry will count the number of cosmic ray detection events and classify them according to particle type. Our integrated circuit (IC) components communicate with the onboard computer (OBC) using I2C protocol, which requires clock and data lines. We have access to one set of clock and data lines from the OBC. An important aspect of I2C is that two devices cannot use the same clock and data lines if they have the same I2C address. Most IC chips which use I2C have address pins which allow you to set the I2C address to avoid overlap. We also have access to a 5 V power supply from the OBC.

As charged particles pass through the scintillator, their kinetic energy is converted into photons which activate cells on the SiPM. The SiPM is an avalanche photodiode, meaning that it consists of an array of photodiode cells. When a photon hits a cell, the cell emits electrons via the photoelectric effect. There is some “dead time” where the cell cannot detect another photon, so having an array of cells allows the SiPM to detect many photons in quick succession. The output pulse generated by the SiPM from a detection event is a sum of the signals generated by all of the photons produced by the particle passing through the scintillator.

The SiPM is AC coupled to a charge-sensitive preamp. In contrast to DC coupling, AC coupling rejects DC components of the signal, blocking any DC bias or offset voltage. AC coupling becomes important when the pulse frequency is sufficiently high that pulses overlap, resulting in a nonzero offset.

The preamp creates output pulses with an integrated voltage equal to the integrated current (i.e. charge) of the input pulses. The charge of the input pulses is physically meaningful because it is proportional to the total energy of the photons collected by the SiPM. The output pulses from the pre-amp look like a steep rising edge followed by an exponential decay with a time constant of ~100 ns. The height of the pulses ranges from 10 mV to 100 mV depending on the type of particle. Because all pulses have approximately the same shape, we can use the height of the pulse as a proxy for the integrated voltage. This pulse height analysis (PHA) is common in radiation detection.

If we had a larger budget, we would use a commercial multi-channel analyzer (MCA). However, instead we bin pulses by pulse height manually. Each pulse height bin is created with a system of three high-speed comparators. Two comparators act as upper and lower discriminators and a third comparator acts as an AND gate, only outputting high if the input voltage is between the two discriminators. The comparators are contained in IC chips with 4 comparators each. We have 7 bins total, so we need 21 comparators or 6 IC chips. The discriminator levels are set by 8 bit digital-to-analog converters (DACs). The DACs are contained in an IC chip with 8 DACs.

The outputs from the comparators are fed into real time clock (RTC) IC chips, which we program to count the number of pulses over the course of 5 min. There are 8 RTC chips, 7 for the pulse height bins and one for counting pulses from the rotary encoder for the GGB. The RTC chips only have one I2C address bin and therefore only two possible I2C addresses. We use an I2C multiplexer to mediate communication between the OBC and the RTC chips. The multiplexer has one input set of clock and data lines and four output sets of clock and data lines which each are used by 2 RTC chips, one with each possible I2C address.

We only have access to a 5 V power supply from the OBC. However, the preamp requires a 12 V power supply and the AC coupling circuit requires a 30 V bias voltage. We use boost converters to generate these voltages from the 5 V supply. All components draw negligible current, so there is no worry about drawing too much current.

The light output of the scintillator is temperature dependent and we don’t know exactly what the equilibrium temperature will be in the CubeSat once it is in space. Therefore, we use resistor temperature devices (RTDs) to monitor the temperature on our custom PCB and near the shielding.

The code for interfacing between the OBC and the I2C components of the circuit is managed by
the software subteam of the CubeSat and is available upon request.
